ν

INTRODUCTION.

Tun object of the present volume is to shew more
completely the precise points of difference between the
Chronicles of Wendover and Paris, by furnishing the
reader with the additions and various readings made by
the latter historiae to the work of the former, and so
rendering the history more perfect, by combining the
labours of both writers, sofar as they are the narratore

of contemporaneous events. In doing this, it was the '

original intention of the editor to include also a col·
lation of the Historia Minor3 hut the perusal of the first
few peges of that work, appended to this Introduction,
will he sufficient, it is hoped, to shew that such an
attempt, however desirable, was altogether impracti·
cahle. The different style of language used in relating
the same events as are recorded in the Greater Chronicle,

the additional matter also with which it is supplied, ¹

would have made it necessary to print volumen in order
to render such a collation at afl perfect. lt does, in·
deed, seem extraordinary that such a collation should
never have been made3 still more so, perhaps, that the
work itsels never should have been printed, being, as
it is, so entirely throughout the original work of Mat·
thew Paris, and existing, as at the present day, in the
onginal handwriting of its ingenious and learned com·
piler.¹ In former times, however, men appear to have
rested equally well satisfied with the Historia Major;

¹ ln the British Murcum, MS. Reg. 14 C. vu. b

 

